when you explode planets things get red
hot
atmospheres are stripped away stuff is
flying apart
everything collapses the world becomes
brighter than a dozen suns
you squeeze your eyes shut and cover
your ears your hair
stands on end the sheer power of a
cosmic blast
is terrifying some time before the
explosion
you're hovering in almost complete
darkness below
you see the moon or what you think looks
like the moon
the surface of this light-colored sphere
is pock-marked with craters left by
meteorites
you see huge steep hills stretching for
miles
it's mercury and right now you're going
to explode it
as if in slow-mo you watch the planet
fall apart
and then in the blink of an eye you see
a wall of debris
closing in on you first giant chunks of
rock
those are all that's left of the
planet's solid crust and rocky mantle
the appearance and structure of the
debris flying in your direction
changes now the stuff looks liquid
like splashes of quicksilver that's
mercury's metallic core
bursting apart it used to take up 85
percent of the planet's volume
and finally it's a firework of solid
pieces again
it's the planet's solid core the
explosion is so powerful
it knocks earth into a different orbit
the sun hiccups
and swallows down an enormous cloud of
dust
that's everything mercury has left
behind
but don't worry our solar system won't
lose any planets
this whole explosion thing is only a
temporary experiment
once you're done watching the show you
press another button
and the planet gets back together as if
you've hit rewind
you approach the next planet on your way
its surface is hiding under a super
dense atmosphere
made up of carbon dioxide if you decided
to land on venus
you'd watch thick clouds of sulfuric
acid pass by
you'd see the planet's surface reddish
brown
dry and incredibly hot you'd probably
walk across flat smooth plains
covering two thirds of the planet's
surface you'd gawk at volcanoes
littering venus
all sixteen hundred of them
unfortunately
you won't be able to do that because you
press the button
boom huge chunks of basalt fly away from
the center of the explosion
that used to be the planet's 12 mile
thick crust
then you spot bright burning meteors
flying towards you at incredible speed
those are chunks of venus's molten rocky
mantle
the fire rain seems endless maybe
because the mantle was 1200 miles thick
but that's not the most massive part of
the planet the power of the explosion
forces apart venus's metallic iron core
this core used to be twice as wide as
the mantle
you reach the blue marble of your home
planet
what will its insides look like
scattered in space
from above earth looks pretty
seventy-one percent of its surface is
blue
because of all that water seas and
oceans
there are also areas of green yellow and
brown and white swirls
you press the button the planet bursts
apart
in a hailstorm of rocks they're what's
left from earth's thin crust
and much much thicker mantle it used to
take up
nearly 84 percent of the entire planet's
volume
you see the rocky rain changed into
something way more liquid
it's scorching hot iron and nickel that
used to make up earth's outer core
the metals weren't under enough pressure
to be solid
the bang is so powerful that it takes
apart earth's inner core
it used to be a solid ball of iron and
nickel
after the pieces fly apart they follow
their own orbits around the sun
the most massive chunks crash into the
moon and some travel further
and get swallowed by our star
you can't linger the red planet is
waiting for you
the surface of mars is covered with
rusty colored dust
the thickness of the dust layer varies
from area to area
but in most places it's seven feet thick
the ground is colored gold brown tan
and even greenish the hue depends on the
minerals that make up the soil
the planet's surface is rocky it's
covered with dry lake beds
craters volcanoes and canyons
[Music]
bang mars is a rocky planet you have to
dodge mountain-sized chunks of crust
made up of volcanic basalt rock what you
see next
looks as if you've blown up huge amounts
of soft rocky toothpaste
that used to be mars's mantle composed
of oxygen
silicates and other minerals and then
the flying pieces get solid again ah
it's the planet's core's turn it was
solid
made mostly of iron nickel and sulfur
billions and trillions of fragments of
all sizes
from a small moon to pieces several feet
wide get
launched in all directions but only very
few parts have enough momentum
to leave the solar system the whole
event slightly changes earth's orbit
and the temperature on our planet goes
up by 18 degrees fahrenheit
you leave rocky planets behind and close
in
on the first gas giant on your way it's
jupiter
thick brown yellow red and white clouds
hide its
surface they make the planet look
colorful and beautifully striped
you hit the button this time the view is
different
instead of chunks of solid crust you see
jet streams of gas
accelerating from the planet's center
it's what used to be jupiter's
atmosphere
made up of hydrogen and helium gas in no
time
the matter hurtling away to space turns
liquid
that's hydrogen changing its form under
immense atmospheric pressure closer to
the center of the planet
a bit later the liquid is already a
mixture of metallic hydrogen and helium
and finally something solid it was
probably jupiter's core
14 to 18 times the mass of earth
the gas giant's diameter was about 90
000 miles
but the blast lasts no more than half a
second
the explosion of jupiter is so strong it
evaporates smaller planets
like mars and earth the sun remains
pretty much untouched
it gets hotter and kind of unstable for
a bit but it doesn't last long
the next gas giant on your way is saturn
at first sight it looks as if the planet
has a surface
the seemingly solid yellowish brown
sphere is surrounded by layers of clouds
saturn's trademark rings are awesome and
colorful
gray beige and tan they're actually
groups of tiny ringlets
that are made up of floating chunks of
water ice rocks
and dust these chunks range in size from
specks
to massive skyscraper sized pieces while
orbiting saturn
they keep colliding and larger pieces
get shattered
you're surprised to see that the rings
aren't perfectly round
they have bends caused by the
gravitational pull from the nearby moons
53 of them are confirmed titan an icy
world bigger than our moon
and even mercury is the largest
what you see looks eerily similar to
what happened when you exploded jupiter
there's only one difference saturn's
rings break apart
sending rocks and ice flying into space
at incredible speed
the largest pieces crash with the
planet's moons
wiping away the smallest of them you see
streams of gas
mostly hydrogen and helium with a bit of
methane
ammonia and water they're moving at
breakneck speed away from where the
center of the planet used to be
after that splashes of liquid matter
that's liquid hydrogen
that later turns metallic and finally
the chunks of the solid core made up of
rocky materials
you're looking at a beautiful blue-green
sphere of the ice giant uranus
the planet gets this unusual hue when
the light from the sun
gets reflected off the planet's surface
plus
uranus atmosphere is mostly hydrogen and
helium
with traces of methane gas that absorb
the red light
anyway bang this time
it's massive blobs of ice that are
hurtling in your direction first
they used to be the part of the planet's
ice mantle that once made up
eighty percent of the planet's volume
but why does this ice look liquid
on uranus frozen liquid isn't solid like
on earth
ice is a hot dense fluid made up of
water
ammonia ice and methane it's often
called the water ammonia
ocean after the bizarre ice rain
you see solid pieces of the planet's
rocky core
it used to be small no more than half
the earth's mass
some of uranus's moons get pulverized in
the explosion
and several even get ejected out of the
solar system
the explosion also slightly shifts
neptune's orbit
and the last planet on your way neptune
it looks blue
because of a layer of swirling gas and
permanent clouds
no time to linger boom
the planet doesn't have a solid surface
that's why after pressing the button
you see neptune's liquid mantle bursting
it looks like a water-filled balloon
thrown down from the 50th floor
this sends splashes of water ammonia and
methane ices
away into space it's followed by
lava-like remains of the planet's mantle
it used to be liquid red hot and rich in
methane
ammonia and water that's what's left
from neptune's solid core
made up of iron and other metals